{:title "Marketing Yourself As A Junior Engineer"
 :main-image {:uri "/images/posts/sprout.jpg"}
 :category :mentoring}

> If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result
> of a hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for
> every victory gained you will also suffer a defeat. If you know
> neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every battle.
> 
> --- Sun Tzu, _The Art of War_

Applying for a junior engineering position, or any job, is an exercise
in marketing and sales. You are the product, and the employer is a
potential customer. To market and sell anything effectively, you need
to understand how the customer thinks.

In this article, I want to explore a bit of employer psychology when
it comes to hiring juniors, and give some suggestions that I
believe increase your chance of success.

<!--more-->

## What An Employer Wants

> What a girl wants  
> What a girl needs  
> Whatever makes me happy sets you free  
> And I'm thanking you for knowing exactly  
>
> --- Christina Aguilera, _What A Girl Wants_

Employers are looking for cheap labour --- the highest productivity
per dollar spent on wages. We're (almost) all living in one big,
globalised, capitalist economy, after all. There are other,
less-cynical benefits that an employer might be hoping to gain from
hiring juniors, but they aren't particularly relevant to how you would
present yourself when applying for one of these roles, so I'm going to
gloss over them here.

However, I think hiring decisions for junior positions are usually
based around avoiding risks, not immediately increasing productivity.
Employers still want productive labour, but they usually understand
that hiring juniors is a long-term play because juniors typically
require time and investment to become productive.

With that in mind, it's probably easier to look at what employers
_don't_ want, instead of what they _do_ want. Some commonly perceived
risks are:

- the junior requiring lots of time from senior engineers,
  significantly reducing overall team productivity

- the junior isolating themselves and becoming secretive with their
  work, for reasons such as: perfectionism, excessive fear of
  embarrassment/failure, avoidant personality traits.

- the junior not improving their skills fast enough, due to things
  like:

  - lack of mentorship from other engineers
  - lack of interest in programming, or lack of a growth mindset
  - being too much of a beginner, who could take many years to reach
    competence

- the junior soaking up all the business's investment into improving
  their skills, reaching mid-level proficiency, and then immediately
  quitting to take a better job somewhere else

## Suggestions For Presenting Yourself As Low-Risk

You application will be screened for the risks mentioned above, and
you will get interview questions designed to asses how risky you are.
A big part of getting an offer for a junior position is demonstrating
that you are a low-risk choice.

Below are some of my recommendations for marketing yourself as a
potential junior engineer.

### 1. Demonstrate Genuine Interest

If you can demonstrate a genuine interest for programming and software
engineering, that shows you have the intrinsic motivation to improve
your skills.

This could be experiments with hot technologies (_"I have a home
server that runs Kubernetes"_) or deep dives into specific topics (_"I
read the ISO8601 specification, and did you know its weeks start on
Monday not Sunday?"_). Blog posts are a good record of this.

I know someone who was the only Australian to have ever enrolled in
the US bootcamp that he completed. One reason for this is that the 9am - 5pm
class times are something like 12am - 8am in Australia. But he
chose this particular bootcamp because it was high quality, and took a
bottom-up approach to learning (learn the boring fundamentals before
even attempting to make an app) instead of a top-down approach (make
an app ASAP then maybe learn the fundamentals later). That shows
dedication.

I also remember at one point having a conversation with him about the
details of JavaScript's prototypal inheritance. This is an example of
a "deep dive" that I mentioned. After a bit of research and
experimentation, he had a better understanding of the topic than the
average mid-level JavaScript developer.

### 2. Demonstrate Independence

I think it's important to demonstrate self-management skills, like the
ability to work and learn independently. It shows that you're capable
of being productive even when the mentorship from other engineers is
lacklustre (and it almost always is).

Personal projects are a good way to do this. The bigger and more
polished they are, the better. The ideal personal project is one that
you have shipped, and can be used by real users.

I know someone who started his transition from his previous career by
taking solo software development courses online --- not just following
free tutorials, but actually completing whole courses --- while still
working his full-time job. That little PDF certificate you get at the
end might not feel very impressive, but it does show that you can get
things done by yourself. This is already a step further than a lot of
aspiring engineers take.

But you don't want to appear _too_ independent, because you also need
to...

### 3. Demonstrate Hunger To Incorporate Feedback

Demonstrate that you seek and incorporate constructive criticism, e.g.

> I couldn't fix a bug after spending a full day on it, so I asked my
> mentor what I was doing wrong. She said that the way I was debugging
> isn't very effective, and she showed me how she would debug it. I
> took some notes about her debugging tactics and I've been using them
> ever since.

This shows that you have the motivation to improve your skills, and
that you're not paralysed by perfectionism or fear of embarrassment.

Junior roles are usually "up or out", meaning that the role is
temporary, and you can't stay in it forever. Your employer will be
expecting you to eventually reach the skill level of the other
engineers you're working with, so show them that you are keen for
whatever mentorship you can get, and that you are going to absorb
everything you can from it.

### 4. Present Yourself As Loyal

I want to preface this by saying that employers often benefit from
instilling and then exploiting an unreciprocated sense of loyalty in
employees. I'm not claiming that being loyal to a company is in your
best interest.

However, some employers _are_ concerned about not getting a suitable
return on their junior "investments" due to "disloyalty". Why? Because
there is a stark difference between hiring for junior roles and hiring
for non-junior roles. When you're trying to get your first job, you're
competing against a _lot_ of other hopeful applicants. Salaries are
usually low, because if you want more money then there are 200 other
applicants to choose from. But once you become proficient and have a
couple of years of professional experience, suddenly you're the belle
of the ball. Good, experienced engineers are hard to find, and that
usually translates into much higher salaries. So when a junior gets
promoted to mid-level and gets a "huge" 10% raise, they might look at
mid-level roles elsewhere and realise they can get a 30% raise by
switching jobs. Certain kinds of employers do not like this.

So when you're interviewing for a junior position, it can't hurt to
drop things like _"I'm looking for a job I can grow into for at least
the next four years or so"_, or _"I know that hiring a junior is an
investment, and I look forward to improving my skills and contributing
back to the business"_, or something like that --- you get the idea.

