{:title "Ditch The Umbrella And Grab Some Sunnies"
 :main-image {:uri "/images/posts/deal-with-it-guy.png"}
 :tags [:bleet]
 :category :software-processes}

Engineering Managers (EMs) are sometimes said to be "shit umbrellas". They are
supposed to keep all the distractions away from the team: the short-lived whims
and fancies of various stakeholders, vague plans that are going to change
several times before being solidified --- all that stuff. Distractions are
poisonous to good software, so hiding them should help the team deliver more and
better software. A large part of this is true.

However, I would like to argue here that behaving like an umbrella is probably
not a good thing. Umbrellas are shields that block rain. And what are these EMs
blocking? Hopefully distractions, but also _information_ and _reality_.

<!--more-->

My first complaint is that hiding distractions may not even be an effective way
to improve the output of an engineering team. How exactly do you classify what
is a distraction, and what isn't? And even if it is a distraction, how can you
be sure that hiding it is a net positive? Typically more information leads to
better decisions, so it makes sense that a team provided with less information
is likely to make worse decisions. It's not too hard to see how umbrella-ing can
backfire.

My second complaint is an ethical one: it's kinda shady. The field of
psychology has a word for the act of withholding information in order to
influence the behaviour of another person, and that word is "manipulation". Even
if it's done with the purest of intentions, if it turns out to have a negative
impact on a team member then the EM is morally culpable. And even if one EM
manipulates with the benevolence of a saint, it creates a power dynamic that a
different, less-scrupulous EM could step into and exploit.

I'd like to propose a better metaphor: sunnies (a.k.a. "sunglasses" outside of
Australia). Sunnies don't block light in the same way an umbrella blocks rain.
Light still passes through, otherwise the wearer wouldn't be able to see.
Sunnies just _soften_ the light, making the wearer comfortable when the light is
overly harsh, and protecting them from harmful ultraviolet radiation.

That's what EMs should be doing --- not blocking reality from the team, but
softening it. Instead of hiding harsh realities, make them more comfortable to
be in. Strip out any unecessary harm, but still let the information through.
Ditch the umbrella and grab some sunnies.

