{:title "High Performance Requires Process"
 :main-image {:uri "/images/posts/high-performance-requires-process.jpg"}
 :category :software-processes}

Processes are a prerequisite for high-performance in software engineering teams
due to their ability to amplify the skill of the team. I believe there exists no
team, given that there is little to no process to begin with, whose performance
could not be improved by adding appropriate process.

<!--more-->

## Reasoning

The performance of software engineering teams, and individual software
engineers, is affected by process: the procedures or steps followed by team
members in their day-to-day workflows. This should not be contentious.

Neither should it be contentious to assert that process has the ability to
destroy productivity. This should be painfully obvious to any software engineer
with a few years of experience — particularly those who have worked in larger
companies, or who have reported to non-technical managers.

The potentially contentious claim I want to make here is that process also has
the ability to _amplify_ team productivity. The way I'm going to argue this is
by appealing to common sense while exploring the counterfactual: that process
can not improve performance.

If it were true that process does not have the ability to improve the
performance of a team, then we could infer that:

- process can, at best, have no impact on performance
- therefore process can only be a hindrance --- it either negatively impacts
  performance or it's a waste of time
- therefore the removal of process can only be positive for team performance
- therefore team performance is optimised by the complete removal of process ---
  a.k.a. anarchy

Based on your experience and common sense, does it stand to reason that anarchy
is the pinnacle of software engineering team performance? Does it sound correct
to you that there exists no process that could be of benefit to a team with
absolutely zero processes?

In my personal experience, anarchy is a predictor of poor performance. It seems
quite obvious to me that anarchy can not possibly be optimal. Even when I'm
working alone on a personal project, I still follow _some_ processes, because
they help me do better than I could do otherwise.

If you reject the position that anarchy is optimal, then you accept the position
that optimal performance can only be achieved with process.

## A Simple Model: Process As A Coefficient

Think of process as a coefficient — that is, a number that multiplies another
number — and think of team performance as the product of process and skill.

A process which requires all engineers to stop working is a coefficient of zero.
Zero multiplied by any skill level produces zero performance.

A bad process is a coefficient less than one. It reduces the skill of the team,
resulting in worse performance. For example, adding a 0.5 coefficient process
would cut the team's performance in half, and removing it would double
performance.

A neutral process is a coefficient of one. It doesn't hurt, but it doesn't help
either, so it's basically just unnecessary complexity.

A good process has a coefficient greater than one. It amplifies the skill of the
team, resulting in better performance than would be possible otherwise. The
point of this article is that good processes do indeed exist.

## Who Cares?

To some software engineers, I'm sure it's plainly obvious that a good team
requires good process. If you're one of those people, then reading this was
probably a waste of time. Soz, lol. You can stop now.

Some people may truly believe that anarchy is indeed optimal for performance in
software engineering teams. How you could arrive at this stance is completely
baffling to me, so I would love to hear your reasoning. If this is you, you can
also stop reading at this point.

This article is for everyone else. It's for the people who shoot down the mere
suggestion that their team might benefit from some kind of new process, without
even attempting to evaluate the pros and cons. If this is you, then I'd argue
that you're making two mistakes.

The first mistake is being irrational. You're incorrectly treating your emotions
as a source of truth. I understand where this emotional reaction comes from, but
the reality is that some processes are bad and some are good. Knee-jerk
rejection of all process is unproductive and unprofessional. The analytical part
of your mind can be used for more than just code, you know.

The second mistake is worse: selfishness. Maybe you've correctly identified that
adopting a particular process would be an inconvenience for you personally.
That's definitely a factor to consider, but it's not the most important one.
Assuming that the process doesn't violate ethical boundaries, the law, or your
employment agreement, the most important factor is the overall benefit to the
_team_. Kneecapping the entire team just to suit your own preferences is kind of
the definition of selfishness. This behaviour is toxic, and I would hope that it
would be considered unacceptable by any decent engineering manager, and dealt
with accordingly.

So if you find yourself in this camp sometimes, please reconsider blindly acting
on your gut. Think about the effect on the team as a whole, and criticise the
process from that perspective. Or just give it a go and evaluate the results.
Ask that the process be reviewed after a couple of weeks before deciding to
adopt it permanently. There are plenty of avenues for productive disagreement
--- take those avenues instead.
